---
title: Frequently asked questions
description: FAQ section
author: minnielahoti
ms.service: azure-virtual-machines
ms.topic: how-to
ms.date: 04/08/2025
ms.author: minnielahoti
ms.reviewer: azmetadatadev
---

# Frequently Asked Questions

## Usage

### How to check if the feature is enabled?

MSP enablement can be checked programmatically using the [GET VM API](https://learn.microsoft.com/rest/api/compute/virtual-machines/get?view=rest-compute-2024-07-01&tabs=HTTP) to retrieve the VM model. The `proxyAgentSettings` properties will report MSP configuration.

Additionally, the GuestProxyAgent instance view in the VM runtime status, reports the state of MSP from its perspective in the VM. If MSP is diabled, the value will show as `"Disabled"`.

### How do we check component health?

The GuestProxyAgent extension instance view will report the status of the GPA and its dependencies. Each component's `status` value will show `RUNNING` when it is healthy.

| Component | Field |
|--|--|
| Guest Proxy Agent | `keyLatchStatus.status` |
| eBPF integration | `ebpfProgramStatus.status` |

Full example:

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.20",
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "monitorStatus": {
    "status": "RUNNING",
    "message": "Monitor thread has not started yet."
  },
  "keyLatchStatus": {
    "status": "RUNNING",
    "message": "Found key details from local and ready to use. 122",
    "states": {
      "imdsRuleId": "/SUBSCRIPTIONS/<guid>/RESOURCEGROUPS/<rg_name>/PROVIDERS/MICROSOFT.COMPUTE/GALLERIES/GALLERYXX/INVMACCESSCONTROLPROFILES/...",
      "secureChannelState": "Wireserver Enforce - IMDS Enforce",
      "keyGuid": "e3882f98-da8d-4410-8394-06c23462781c",
      "WireserverRuleId": "/SUBSCRIPTIONS/<guid>/RESOURCEGROUPS/<rg_name>/PROVIDERS/MICROSOFT.COMPUTE/GALLERIES/GALLERYXX/INVMACCESSCONTROLPROFILES/..."
    }
  },
  "ebpfProgramStatus": {
    "status": "RUNNING",
    "message": "Started Redirector with eBPF maps - 143"
  },
  "proxyListenerStatus": {
    "status": "RUNNING",
    "message": "Started proxy listener 127.0.0.1:3080, ready to accept request - 27"
  },
  "telemetryLoggerStatus": {
    "status": "RUNNING",
    "message": "Telemetry event logger thread started."
  },
  "proxyConnectionsCount": 590
}
```

### Can I provision a new Linux VM with MSP enabled without baking the GPA into my image?

No. Linux provisioning doesn't have a step where the platform can install additional software before the VM is handed over to the customer. Additionally, this model isn't something most Linux customers want, it's more in line with the Windows philosophy.

For security reasons MSP does not allow a VM to successfully provision if a secure connection hasn't been established. The GPA is responsible for establishing the secure connection, so it is required to already be present.

If you do not wish to use an image with the GPA baked in, you must create the VM first then enable MSP afterwards. During preview we will monitor usage patterns and evaluate potential ways to support the scenario, in particular by allowing the GPA to be installed as a VM Extension rather than baked in.

## Features

### Are ARM64 VM/VMSS Supported?

ARM64 support will be available once the MSP feature is Generally Available.

## Design

### How is the latched key created? How does it bind to the VM? Can it be impersonated?

The latched key is generated by the Azure Host and is stored as platform data. The key is unique to each VM and only can be used on that VM's private connection to WireServer + IMDS. 

### How is the Allowlist (policy) provisioned? Is it done in a secure way?

The Allowlist is defined as part of the VM model. The [Advanced Configuration](configuration.md) guide explains how to create an Allowlist. The Guest Proxy Agent retrieves this policy periodically from WireServer like any other VM metadata. This allows users to centrally manage policy the same way they would other VM settings, and prevents users from within the VM from tampering with it.

### Where is the Allowlist enforced? In Guest or in Wireserver?

Both components play a role in enforcement. MSP uses a shared responsibility model:

- Wireserver / IMDS are responsible for ensuring that only the trusted delegate (the GPA) and clients that the trusted delegate endorses can access the VMs metadata and secrets.
  - Metadata services can't, and shouldn't, perform VM introspection, meaning they alone can't determine which software within a VM made a request.
- The trusted delegate (the GPA) is responsible for determining the identity of clients and endorsing requests that approve from.
  - The GPA can rely on the OS Kernel to authoritatively identify which process within the VM made a request.

The most important element is that MSP is a default closed model whereas other security measures (like in guest firewall rules) are default open. If the GPA is down or otherwise bypassed, Wireserver will still reject any requests as they won't be endorsed by the latched key. This is in sharp contrast to filter based mechanisms which can be circumvented.

### Why is this feature opt-in and not required or automatically enabled?

IMDS is used by nearly every IaaS VM/VMSS in Azure. The diversity of workloads requires flexibility. While the design of MSP abstracts away most breaking changes, ultimately if a workload is dependent on a less secure configuration, enforcing stronger security will still break the workload.

### Why a new agent and not an Azure Guest Agent update?

The Guest Proxy Agent (GPA) has different responsibilities than the Guest Agent. The GPA also has higher performance requirements.
